สวิสอินเตอร์เนชันแนลแอร์ไลน์ (อังกฤษ : Swiss International Air Lines ) เป็นสายการบินของประเทศสวิตเซอร์แลนด์ เป็นบริษัทลูกของลุฟต์ฮันซา มีฐานบินหลักอยู่ที่ท่าอากาศยานซูริค ให้บริการสู่จุดหมายปลายทางในทวีปอเมริกาเหนือ อเมริกาใต้ แอฟริกา และเอเชีย


== จุดหมายปลายทาง ==


== ข้อตกลงการทำการบินร่วม ==
Aside from codeshares with Star Alliance partners, Swiss codeshares with the following carriers:
Adria Airways (SA) – Codeshare agreement on Zurich–Ljubljana flights.
แอร์แคนาดา (SA) – Codeshare agreement on Zurich–Toronto flights. Connecting flights via Toronto/Montreal to Vancouver, Calgary, Winnipeg, Halifax, Ottawa, Quebec.
แอร์ฟรานซ์ – Codeshare agreement on Geneva–Paris Charles de Gaulle flights.
แอร์อินเดีย – Codeshare agreement on Zurich-Mumbai & Zurich-Delhi flights. These code share flights are in benefit for Air India because it does not serve Switzerland, so it is Swiss who transports passengers under an Air India ticket who with to fly to Zurich. In India Swiss International Airlines serves Delhi and Mumbai.
Air One – Codeshare agreement on Zurich–Napoli and Catania flights.
ออลนิปปอนแอร์เวย์ (SA) – Codeshare agreement on SWISS Zurich–Tokyo flights.
ออสเตรียนแอร์ไลน์ (SA) – Codeshare agreement on all routes between Switzerland and Austria.
Blue1 (SA) – Codeshare agreement on Zurich–Helsinki flights.
Brussels Airlines – Codeshare agreement on all routes between Switzerland and Belgium.
Cirrus Airlines – Codeshare agreement on Zurich–Dresden and Zurich–Salzburg flights.
Croatia Airlines (SA) – Codeshare agreement on Zurich–Zagreb flights.
Darwin Airline – Operates flights Zurich–Lugano on behalf of SWISS.
Edelweiss Air – Codeshare agreement on flights with individual seats to 15 holiday destinations from Zurich and to 2 holiday destinations from Geneva.
อียิปต์แอร์ (SA) – Codeshare agreement on all routes between Switzerland and Egypt.
El Al – Codeshare agreement on Zurich–Tel Aviv and Geneva–Tel Aviv flights.
Jet Airways – Airline agreement only
LOT Polish Airlines (SA) – Codeshare agreement on all routes between Switzerland and Poland.
ลุฟต์ฮันซา (SA) – On several flights between Germany and Switzerland and on selected European and intercontinental connections.
PrivatAir – PrivatAir operates on behalf of Swiss on all flights between Zurich International Airport and Newark Liberty International Airport in an all-business class Boeing 737-BBJ 56-seat configuration.
กาตาร์แอร์เวย์ – Codeshare agreement on Zurich–Doha flights.
Rossiya – Codeshare agreement on Zurich-Saint Petersburg flights.
Scandinavian Airlines System (SA) – Codeshare agreement on all routes between Switzerland and Sweden, Denmark, Norway and selected beyond routes via Copenhagen gateway.
South African Airways (SA) – Codeshare agreement on connecting flights via Johannesburg to Cape Town, Durban and Windhoek.
Spanair (SA) – Codeshare agreement on all routes between Switzerland and Spain.
TAP Portugal (SA) – Codeshare agreement on all routes between Switzerland and Portugal.
การบินไทย (SA) – เที่ยวบินระหว่างสวิตเซอร์แลนด์และไทย
Ukraine International Airlines – Codeshare agreement on Zurich-Kiev flights.
ยูไนเต็ดแอร์เวย์ (SA) – Codeshare agreement on all flights between Switzerland and the US and on selected European and US connections.
ยูเอสแอร์เวย์ (SA) – Codeshare on the Zurich-Philadelphia route and on 10 routes throughout Europe via the Zurich gateway.
Note: This list includes Star Alliance (SA) partners.


== ฝูงบิน ==

อายุเฉลี่ยของเครื่องบินคือ 10.9 ปี (2012)
The aircraft fleet is to be renamed after local towns and cities over the next two years. The names will be featured on the aircraft fuselage, with cabin interiors showing the coat of arms of the town or city. The latest fleet addition, an Airbus A330, is the first to follow this scheme, as Berne.
Six Airbus A340 aircraft are to be added to the fleet. The first of which is an ex-Air Canada plane[1]. Three more ex-Air Canada A340s are to be added along with two ex-Austrian Airlines to increase frequencies on existing routes and to launch new routes for summer 2008.
Two Airbus A330 aircraft are also being added to the fleet. The first one will replace an Airbus A300-600 in November 2006 which was leased from Hapag-Lloyd, and the second in mid-December 2006, both to increase route frequencies.
The short haul fleet is also expected to expand with plans confirmed in September 2006 to add two Airbus A321 and one Airbus A320 aircraft. To avail the market chances, Swiss added 2 additional Airbus A320 aircraft to their fleet earlier than planned. The aircraft were added