1975 (MCMLXXV) was a common year starting on Wednesday (dominical letter E) of the Gregorian calendar, the 1975th year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 975th year of the 2nd millennium, the 75th year of the 20th century, and the 6th year of the 1970s decade. It was also declared the International Women's Year by the United Nations and the European Architectural Heritage Year by the Council of Europe.


== Events ==


=== January ===

January
Altair 8800 is released, sparking the microcomputer revolution.
Volkswagen introduces the Golf, its new front-wheel-drive economy car, in the United States and Canada as the Volkswagen Rabbit.

January 1
Stevie Nicks and Lindsey Buckingham join Fleetwood Mac.
Watergate scandal (United States): John N. Mitchell, H. R. Haldeman and John Ehrlichman are found guilty of the Watergate cover-up.
Malawi changes its capital city from Zomba to Lilongwe.

January 2
The Federal Rules of Evidence are approved by the United States Congress.
Bangladesh revolutionary leader Siraj Sikder is killed by police while in custody.

January 5 – Tasman Bridge disaster: The Tasman Bridge in Hobart, Tasmania, Australia, is struck by the bulk ore carrier MV Lake Illawarra, killing 12 people.
January 6 – United States television debuts:
Game show Wheel of Fortune premieres on NBC.
AM America makes its television debut on ABC.

January 7 – OPEC agrees to raise crude oil prices by 10%.
January 8
Ella Grasso becomes Governor of Connecticut, the first female U.S. governor who does not succeed her husband.
U.S. President Gerald Ford appoints Vice President Nelson Rockefeller to head a special commission looking into alleged domestic abuses by the CIA.

January 14 – Heiress Lesley Whittle, 17, is kidnapped from her home in Shropshire, England by Donald Neilson.
January 15
Alvor Agreement: Portugal announces that it will grant independence to Angola on November 11.
International Women's Year is launched in Britain by Princess Alexandra and Barbara Castle.
Steel roller coaster Space Mountain (Magic Kingdom) opens at Walt Disney World in Florida, becoming one of the park's most popular attractions into the 21st century.

January 18 – The United States Atomic Energy Commission is divided between the Energy Research and Development Administration and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, partly in response to the 1973 oil crisis.
January 19 – 1975 Kinnaur earthquake: An earthquake strikes Himachal Pradesh, India.
January 20
In Hanoi, North Vietnam, the Politburo approves the final military offensive against South Vietnam.
American talent agent Michael Ovitz founds the Creative Artists Agency.
Work is abandoned on the British end of the Channel Tunnel.

January 24 – Jazz pianist Keith Jarrett plays the solo improvisation 'The Köln Concert' at the Cologne Opera, which, recorded live, becomes the best-selling piano recording in history.
January 26 – Immaculata University defeats the University of Maryland 80-48 in the first nationally televised women's basketball game in the United States.
January 29 – The Weather Underground radical student group bombs the United States Department of State main office in Washington, D.C.


=== February ===

February 1 – The Intercontinental Broadcasting Corporation is launched in the Philippines.
February 4 – The Haicheng earthquake, the first successfully predicted earthquake, kills 2,041 and injures 27,538 in Haicheng, Liaoning, China.
February 6 – A crucial by-election is held in Kankesanthurai, Sri Lanka.
February 9 – The Soyuz 17 crew (Georgy Grechko, Aleksei Gubarev) returns to Earth after 1 month aboard the Salyut 4 space station.
February 11
Margaret Thatcher defeats Edward Heath for the leadership of the opposition UK Conservative Party. Thatcher, 49, is Britain's first female leader of any political party.
Colonel Richard Ratsimandrava, President of Madagascar, is assassinated.

February 13
A "Turkish Federated State of North Cyprus" is declared as an unsuccessful first step to international recognition of a Turkish Cypriot separatist state in Cyprus.
A fire breaks out in the World Trade Center.

February 21 – Watergate scandal: Former United States Attorney General John N. Mitchell, and former White House aides H. R. Haldeman and John Ehrlichman, are sentenced to between 30 months and 8 years in prison.
February 23 – In response to the energy crisis, daylight saving time commences nearly 2 months early in the United States.
February 26 – A fleeing Provisional Irish Republican Army member shoots and kills off-duty London police officer Stephen Tibble, 22, as he gives chase.
February 27 – The 2 June Movement kidnaps West German politician Peter Lorenz. He is released on March 4 after most of the kidnappers' demands are met.
February 28
A major tube train crash at Moorgate station, London kills 43 people.
In Lomé, Togo, the European Economic Community and 46 African, Caribbean and Pacific countries sign a financial and economic treaty, known as the first Lomé Convention.


=== March ===

March 1
Aston Villa win the Football League Cup at Wembley, beating Norwich City 1–0 in the final.
Australian television switches to full-time colour.

March 4
Charlie Chaplin is knighted by Elizabeth II.
A Canadian parliamentary committee is televised for the first time.

March 6
Algiers Accord: Iran and Iraq announce a settlement in their border dispute.
A bomb explodes in the Paris offices of the Springer Press. The 6 March Group (connected to the Red Army Faction) demands amnesty for the Baader-Meinhof Group.

March 7 – The body of teenage heiress Lesley Whittle, kidnapped 7 weeks earlier by the "Black Panther", is discovered in Staffordshire, England.
March 8 – The United Nations proclaims International Women's Day.
March 9 – Construction of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System begins.
March 10
Vietnam War: North Vietnamese troops attack Ban Mê Thuột, South Vietnam, on their way to capturing Saigon.
The Rocky Horror Show opens on Broadway in New York City; closed after 3 previews and 45 performances.
An extended portion of Sanyō Shinkansen between Okayama Station and Hakata Station opens, thus making Shinkansen reach the second island, Kyushu, Japan.

March 11 – The leftist military government in Portugal defeats a rightist coup attempt.
March 13 – Vietnam War: South Vietnam President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu orders the Central Highlands evacuated. This turns into a mass exodus involving troops and civilians (the Convoy of Tears).
March 15 – In Brazil, Guanabara State merges into the state of Rio de Janeiro. The state's capital moves from the city of Niterói to the city of Rio de Janeiro.
March 22 – Ding-a-dong by Teach-In (music by Dick Bakker, text by Will Luikinga and Eddy Ouwens) wins the 20th Eurovision Song Contest 1975 for the Netherlands.
March 25 – King Faisal of Saudi Arabia is shot and killed by his nephew; the killer is beheaded on June 18. (King Khalid succeeds Faisal.)
March 28 – A fire in the maternity wing at Kucic Hospital in Rijeka, former Yugoslavia, kills 25 people.
March 31
Süleyman Demirel of AP forms the new government of Turkey (39th government, a four-party coalition, so-called First National Front (Turkish: Milliyetçi cephe)).
In his final game on the sideline, John Wooden coaches UCLA to its 10th national championship in 12 seasons when the Bruins defeat Kentucky 92-85 in the title game at San Diego.


=== April ===

April 3 – Bobby Fischer refuses to play in a chess match against Anatoly Karpov, giving Karpov the title.
April 4
Vietnam War: The first military Operation Babylift flight, C5A 80218, crashes 27 minutes after takeoff, killing 138 on board; 176 survive the crash.
Bill Gates and Paul Allen found Microsoft in Albuquerque, New Mexico.

April 5 – The Soviet manned space mission Soyuz 18a ends in failure during its ascent into orbit when a critical malfunction occurs in the second and third stages of the booster rocket during staging, resulting in the cosmonauts and their Soyuz spacecraft having to be ripped free from the vehicle. Both cosmonauts survive.
April 9
Asia's first professional basketball league, the Philippine Basketball Association, plays its first game at the Araneta Coliseum.
Eight people in South Korea, who are involved in the People's Revolutionary Party Incident, are hanged.

April 13
Bus massacre: The Kataeb militia kills 27 Palestinians during an attack on their bus in Ain El Remmeneh, Lebanon, triggering the Lebanese Civil War which lasts until 1990.
A coup d'état in Chad led by the military overthrows and kills President François Tombalbaye.

April 17 – The Khmer Republic surrenders, when the Communist Khmer Rouge guerilla forces capture Phnom Penh ending the Cambodian Civil War, with mass evacuation of American troops and Cambodian civilians.
April 18 – The Khmer Rouge beings prompting a forcible mass evacuation of the city and starting the genocide.
April 24 – Six Red Army Faction terrorists take over the West German embassy in Stockholm, take 11 hostages and demand the release of the group's jailed members; shortly after, they are captured by Swedish police (See West German Embassy siege).
April 25 – Vietnam War: As North Vietnamese Army forces close in on the South Vietnamese capital Saigon, the Australian Embassy is closed and evacuated, almost 10 years to the day since the first Australian troop commitment to South Vietnam.
April 30 – The Vietnam War ends with the Fall of Saigon: The Vietnam War concludes as Communist forces from North Vietnam take Saigon, resulting in mass evacuation of the remaining American troops and South Vietnam civilians. As the capital is taken, South Vietnam surrenders unconditionally and is replaced with the temporary Provisional Government.


=== May ===

May 1 – The Cold War between Cambodia and Vietnam begins, which eventually leads to the Cambodian–Vietnamese War.
May 3 – West Ham United win the FA Cup at Wembley, beating Fulham 2–0 in the final. Both goals are scored by Alan Taylor. West Ham legend Bobby Moore, appears for Fulham.
May 5 – The Busch Gardens Williamsburg theme park opens in Virginia.
May 12 – Mayaguez incident: Khmer Rouge forces in Cambodia seize the United States merchant ship Mayaguez in international waters.
May 15 – Mayaguez incident: The American merchant ship Mayaguez, seized by Cambodian forces, is rescued by the U.S. Navy and Marines; 38 Americans are killed.
May 16
Sikkim accedes to India after a referendum and abolishes the Chogyal, its monarchy.
Junko Tabei becomes the first woman to reach the summit of Mount Everest.

May 25
Indianapolis 500: Bobby Unser wins for a second time in a rain-shorted 174 lap, 435 mile (696 km) race.
– Golden State Warriors win NBA championship

May 27 – The Dibbles Bridge coach crash near Grassington, North Yorkshire, England results in 32 deaths (the highest ever toll in a United Kingdom road accident).
May 28 – Fifteen West African countries sign the Treaty of Lagos, creating the Economic Community of West African States.


=== June ===

June 5
The Suez Canal opens for the first time since the Six-Day War.
The United Kingdom votes yes in a referendum to stay in the European Community.

June 6 – The Georgetown Agreement, formally creating the ACP Group, is signed.
June 9 – The Order of Australia is awarded for the first time.
June 10 – In Washington, D.C., the Rockefeller Commission issues its report on CIA abuses, recommending a joint congressional oversight committee on intelligence.
June 18 JAWS is released and becomes popular summer hit
June 19 – Richard Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan is found guilty in absentia of the murder of nanny Sandra Rivett.
June 23 – Markus Zusak, writer of the Book Thief and Messenger is born.
June 25
Prime Minister Indira Gandhi declares a state of emergency in India, suspending civil liberties and elections.
Mozambique gains independence from Portugal.

June 26 – Two FBI agents and 1 AIM member die in a shootout, at the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota.


=== July ===

July 1 – The Postmaster-General's Department is disaggregated into the Australian Telecommunications Commission (trading as Telecom Australia) and the Australian Postal Commission (trading as Australia Post).
July 4 – Sydney newspaper publisher Juanita Nielsen disappears, and is presumed to have been murdered.
July 5 – Cape Verde gains independence after 500 years of Portuguese rule.
July 6
The Comoros declares and is granted their independence from France.
Ruffian, an American champion thoroughbred racehorse breaks down in a match race against Kentucky Derby winner, Foolish Pleasure; she has to be euthanized the following day.

July 9 – The National Assembly of Senegal passes a law that will pave way for a multi-party system (albeit highly restricted).
July 12 – São Tomé and Príncipe declare independence from Portugal.
July 17 – Apollo–Soyuz Test Project: A manned American Apollo spacecraft and the manned Soviet Soyuz spacecraft for the Soyuz 19 mission, docks in orbit, marking the first such link-up between spacecraft from the 2 nations.
July 30 – In Detroit, former Teamsters Union president Jimmy Hoffa is reported missing.


=== August ===

August 1 – The Helsinki Accords, which officially recognize Europe's national borders and respect for human rights, are signed in Finland.
August 3 – The Louisiana Superdome opens in New Orleans.
August 5 – U.S. President Ford posthumously restores the U.S. citizenship of General Robert E. Lee, military leader of the Confederate States of America during the American Civil War.
August 8
The Banqiao Dam, in China's Henan Province, fails after Typhoon Nina; over 200,000 people perish.
Samuel Bronfman II, son of the president of Seagram's, is kidnapped in Purchase, New York.

August 11
British Leyland Motor Corporation comes under British government control.
Governor Mário Lemos Pires of Portuguese East Timor abandons the capital Dili, following a UDT coup and the outbreak of civil war between UDT and Fretilin.

August 15
The Birmingham Six are wrongfully sentenced to life imprisonment in Great Britain (they are released 1991).
Founder President Sheikh Mujibur Rahman of Bangladesh is killed during a coup led by Major Syed Faruque Rahman.

August 20 – Viking program: NASA launches the Viking 1 planetary probe toward Mars.
August 24 – Officers responsible for the military coup in Greece in 1967 are sentenced to death in Athens. The sentences are later commuted to life imprisonment.


=== September ===

September–October – In New Zealand, Māori leader Whina Cooper leads a march of 5,000 people, in support of Maori claims to their land.
September 5
In Sacramento, California, Lynette Fromme, a follower of jailed cult leader Charles Manson, attempts to assassinate U.S. President Gerald Ford, but is thwarted by a Secret Service agent.
The London Hilton Hotel is bombed by the Provisional Irish Republican Army; 2 people are killed and 63 injured.

September 6 – An earthquake with a Richter magnitude of 6.7 kills at least 2,085 in Diyarbakır and Lice, Turkey.
September 9 – Riverfront Coliseum opens in Cincinnati.
September 14
Elizabeth Seton is canonized, becoming the first American Roman Catholic saint.
Rembrandt's painting "The Night Watch" is slashed a dozen times at the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam.

September 15 – The French department of "Corse", comprising the entire island of Corsica, is divided into two departments: Haute-Corse (Upper Corsica) and Corse-du-Sud (Southern Corsica).

September 16 – Papua New Guinea gains its independence from Australia.
September 18 – Fugitive Patty Hearst is captured in San Francisco.
September 19
General Vasco Gonçalves is ousted as Prime Minister of Portugal.
The British comedy sitcom Fawlty Towers airs on BBC 2.

September 20 – The term of Tuanku Al-Mutassimu Billahi Muhibbudin Sultan Abdul Halim Al-Muadzam Shah ibni Almarhum Sultan Badlishah, as the 5th Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia, ends.
September 21 – Sultan Yahya Petra ibni Almarhum Sultan Ibrahim Petra of Kelantan, becomes the 6th Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia.
September 22 – U.S. President Gerald Ford survives a second assassination attempt, this time by Sara Jane Moore in San Francisco.
September 24 – Dougal Haston and Doug Scott on the 1975 British Mount Everest Southwest Face expedition become the first people to reach the summit of Mount Everest by any of its faces and the first Britons to reach the summit by any route.
September 27
Francoist Spain executes 5 ETA and FRAP members, the last executions in Spain to date.
The Norwood Football Club beats the Glenelg Football Club in the South Australian National Football League (SANFL) Australian rules football Grand Final.

September 28 – The Spaghetti House siege takes place in London.
September 30 – The Hughes Helicopters (later McDonnell-Douglas, now Boeing IDS) AH-64 Apache makes its first flight.


=== October ===

October 1 – Thrilla in Manila: Muhammad Ali defeats Joe Frazier in a boxing match in Manila, Philippines.
October 2 – A blast at an explosives factory kills 6 in Beloeil, Quebec.
October 9 – A bomb explosion outside the Green Park tube station near Piccadilly in London kills 1 and injures 20.
October 11 – NBC airs the first episode of Saturday Night Live (George Carlin is the first host; Billy Preston and Janis Ian the first musical guests).
October 16
The "Balibo Five" Australian television journalists are killed at Balibo by Indonesian Army special forces in the buildup to the Indonesian invasion of East Timor.
The last naturally occurring case of smallpox is diagnosed and treated, the victim being two-year-old Rahima Banu.

October 21 – 1975 World Series: The Cincinnati Reds are defeated by the Boston Red Sox in Game Six off Carlton Fisk's 12th-inning home run to cap off what many consider to be the best World Series game ever played.
October 22 – The Reds defeat the Red Sox 4 games to 3 in a broadcast that breaks records for a televised sporting event.
October 27 – Robert Poulin kills 1 and wounds 5 at St. Pius X High School in Ottawa, Canada before shooting himself.
October 30
Peter Sutcliffe (the "Yorkshire Ripper") commits his first murder, that of Wilma McCann.
Juan Carlos I of Spain becomes acting head of state after dictator Francisco Franco concedes that he is too ill to govern.


=== November ===

November 3
An independent audit of Mattel, one of the United States' largest toy manufacturers, reveals that company officials fabricated press releases and financial information to "maintain the appearance of continued corporate growth."
The first petroleum pipeline opens from Cruden Bay to Grangemouth, Scotland.
The long-running television game show The Price Is Right expands from 30 minutes to its current hour-long format on CBS.

November 6
The Green March begins: 300,000 unarmed Moroccans converge on the southern city of Tarfaya and wait for a signal from King Hassan II of Morocco to cross into Western Sahara.
The Sex Pistols play their first gig at Saint Martins College, London.

November 7 – A vapor cloud explosion at a petroleum cracking facility in Geleen, Netherlands leaves 14 dead and 109 injured, with fires lasting for 5 days.
November 10
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 3379: By a vote of 72–35 (with 32 abstentions), the United Nations General Assembly approves a resolution equating Zionism with racism. The resolution provokes an outcry among Jews around the world. It is repealed in 1991.
The 729-foot (222 m)-long freighter SS Edmund Fitzgerald sinks during a storm 17 miles (27 km) from the entrance to Whitefish Bay on Lake Superior, killing all 29 crew members on board (an event immortalized in song by Gordon Lightfoot).
Lev Leshchenko revives "Den Pobedy", one of the most popular World War II songs in the USSR.

November 11
Angola becomes independent from Portugal; civil war soon erupts.
Australian constitutional crisis of 1975: Governor-General of Australia Sir John Kerr dismisses the government of Gough Whitlam and commissions Malcolm Fraser as Prime Minister.
The first annual Vogalonga rowing "race" is held in Venice, Italy.

November 14 – Madrid Accords: Spain abandons Western Sahara.
November 15 – The "Group of 6" (G-6) industrialized nations is formed.
November 16 – Beginning of the Third Cod War between UK and Iceland, which lasts until June 1976.
November 20
Former California Governor Ronald Reagan enters the race for the Republican presidential nomination, challenging incumbent President Gerald Ford.
Spanish dictator Francisco Franco dies in Madrid, effectively marking the end of the dictatorship established following the Spanish Civil War and the beginning of Spain's transition to democracy.

November 22 – Juan Carlos is declared King of Spain following the death of dictator Francisco Franco; he would reign until his abdication in 2014.

November 25
Suriname gains independence from the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
The Provisional Irish Republican Army is outlawed in the United Kingdom.

November 26 – The 1975 cult classic movie The Rocky Horror Picture Show is released in America.
November 27 – Ross McWhirter, co-founder of the Guinness Book of Records, is shot dead by the Provisional Irish Republican Army for offering reward money to informers.
November 28 – Portuguese Timor declares its independence from Portugal as East Timor.
November 29
The name "Micro-soft" (for microcomputer software) is used by Bill Gates in a letter to Paul Allen for the first time (Microsoft becomes a registered trademark on November 26, 1976).
While disabled, the submarine tender USS Proteus discharges radioactive coolant water into Apra Harbor, Guam. A Geiger counter at two of the harbor's public beaches shows 100 millirems/hour, 50 times the allowable dose.


=== December ===

December 2 – In Laos, the communist party of the Pathet Lao takes over Vientiane and defeats the Kingdom of Laos, forcing King Sisavang Vatthana to abdicate and creating the Lao People's Democratic Republic. This ends the Laotian Civil War, with mass evacuation of American troops and Laotian civilians.
December 3 – The ongoing Insurgency in Laos begins with the Pathet Lao fighting the Hmongs, Royalist-in-exile and the Right-wings.
– The 1916 wreck of HMHS Britannic is found in the Kea Channel by Jacques Cousteau.

December 8 – New York City is approved for bailout of 2.3 billion each year through to 1978 – 6.9 billion total.
December 7 – Indonesian invasion of East Timor: Indonesia invades East Timor; the occupation continues until 1999, when U.N. peacekeepers take over control until 2002.
December 21 – Six people, including Carlos the Jackal, kidnap delegates of an OPEC conference in Vienna.
December 25 – The heavy metal band Iron Maiden is formed by Steve Harris in London.
December 29 – A bomb explosion at LaGuardia Airport in New York City kills 11 people.


=== Date unknown ===
The Spanish Army quits Spanish Sahara (modern-day Western Sahara), last remnant of the Spanish Empire. The Sahrawi Republic (RASD) is created. Morocco invades the former territory.
The government of Colombia announces the finding of Ciudad Perdida.
Benoit Mandelbrot coins the mathematical term fractal.
Lyme disease is first diagnosed at Lyme, Connecticut.
Victoria (Australia) abolishes capital punishment.
South Australia becomes the first Australian state to decriminalize homosexual acts between consenting adults.
Some members of Jehovah's Witnesses believe that Armageddon will occur this year based on the group's chronology and a few sell their houses and businesses to prepare for the new world paradise which they believed will be created when Jesus establishes God's Kingdom on Earth.
Peter Gabriel departs Genesis, and is replaced on lead vocals by drummer Phil Collins.
The first monster truck, Bigfoot, is created by Bob Chandler.


=== World population ===


== Births ==


=== January ===

January 1
Sonali Bendre, Indian actress
Eiichiro Oda, Japanese manga artist
Tammy Homolka, Canadian murder victim (d. 1990)

January 2 – Dax Shepard, American actor
January 3
Thomas Bangalter, French DJ (Daft Punk)
Danica McKellar, American actress and education advocate

January 5
Bradley Cooper, American actor
Mike Grier, American hockey player

January 6
Yukana Nogami, Japanese voice actress
Ricardo Santos, Brazilian beach volleyball player

January 8 – Chris Simmons, British actor
January 10 – Jake Delhomme, American football player
January 11
Rory Fitzpatrick, American hockey player
Matteo Renzi, Italian Prime Minister

January 13 – Shazia Mirza, British comedian
January 15
Marc Cartwright, American photographer
Mary Pierce, French tennis player

January 16 – Anthony Taberna, Filipino broadcast journalist and radio commentator
January 17
Tony Brown, New Zealand rugby union footballer
Freddy Rodriguez, Puerto Rican actor

January 20
David Eckstein, American baseball player
Mark Allan Robinson, Canadian recall leader

January 22 – Balthazar Getty, American actor
January 23 – Tito Ortiz, American mixed martial arts fighter
January 24 – Paul Marazzi, English singer (A1)
January 25
Mia Kirshner, Canadian actress
Tim Montgomery, American athlete
John Wade, American football player

January 28
Lee Latchford-Evans, English singer (Steps)
David Zingler, American writer
Terri Conn, American actress

January 29
Sharif Atkins, American television actor
Sara Gilbert, American actress

January 30 – Yumi Yoshimura, Japanese singer (Puffy AmiYumi)
January 31
Jackie O, Australian radio DJ and TV presenter
Preity Zinta, Indian actress


=== February ===

February 1 – Big Boi, American rapper
February 2
Todd Bertuzzi, Canadian hockey player
Ieroklis Stoltidis, Greek footballer

February 4 – Natalie Imbruglia, Australian actress and singer
February 6 – Tomoko Kawase, Japanese singer
February 9 – Vladimir Guerrero, Dominican baseball player
February 10 – Hiroki Kuroda, Japanese baseball pitcher
February 11 – Jacque Vaughn, American basketball player
February 14 – Malik Zidi, French actor
February 16 – Nanase Aikawa, Japanese singer
February 17
Harisu, South Korean singer, model and actress
Todd Harvey, Canadian National Hockey League player
Václav Prospal, Czech National Hockey League player

February 18
Keith Gillespie, Northern Irish footballer
Gary Neville, English footballer
Sarah Brown, American actress

February 20 – Brian Littrell, American pop singer (Backstreet Boys)
February 21 – Mark Ross, American rock singer and entrepreneur
February 22 – Drew Barrymore, American actress
February 23 – Wilfred Kibet Kigen, Kenyan long-distance runner
February 25
Chiemi Chiba, Japanese voice actress
Chelsea Handler, American comedian and television host

February 26
Jenny Bridges, American bluegrass-country singer


=== March ===

March 1
Maya Kulenovic, Canadian painter
Valentina Monetta, Sammarinese singer

March 2 – Kim Jung-eun, South Korean actress
March 4
Myrna Veenstra, Dutch field hockey player
Jerod Turner, American professional golfer

March 5
Jolene Blalock, American actress
Niki Taylor, American model

March 7
Audrey Marie Anderson, American actress
Leon Dunne, Australian swimmer
T. J. Thyne, American actor

March 9
Roy Makaay, Dutch footballer
Lisa Miskovsky, Swedish musician

March 11
Eric the Midget, American TV personality
Buvaisar Saitiev, Chechen wrestler, Olympic gold-medalist

March 12 – Kéllé Bryan, English singer (Eternal)
March 15
Eva Longoria, American actress
Veselin Topalov, Bulgarian chess player
will.i.am, African-American rapper and singer (The Black Eyed Peas)

March 17
Andrew Martin, Canadian professional wrestler (d. 2009)
Natalie Zea, American actress

March 18
Brian Griese, American football player
Sutton Foster, American actress

March 19
Vivian Hsu, Taiwanese singer, actress and model
Le Jingyi, Chinese swimmer
Matthew Richardson, Australian rules footballer

March 25
Ladislav Benýšek, Czech ice hockey player
Melanie Blatt, English singer (All Saints)

March 27 – Fergie, American pop/R&B singer/rapper of the Black Eyed Peas and actress
March 28 – Richard Kelly, American director
March 29 – Jan Bos, Dutch speed skater
March 30 – Bahar Soomekh, American actress


=== April ===

April 2 – Adam Rodríguez, American actor
April 3
Yoshinobu Takahashi, Japanese professional baseball player
Koji Uehara, Japanese baseball pitcher

April 4
Delphine Arnault, French businesswoman and entrepreneur
Scott Rolen, American baseball player

April 5 – Juicy J, American rapper, songwriter and record producer
April 6
Zach Braff, American actor
Sónia Lopes, Cape Verdean middle distance and long-distance runner

April 7
Ronde Barber, American football player
Tiki Barber, American football player
John Cooper, America musician, bass guitarist and lead singer (Skillet)

April 8 – Anouk, Dutch singer-songwriter and producer
April 9 – Robbie Fowler, British footballer
April 10 – Matthew Phillips, Italian rugby union footballer
April 13 – Bruce Dyer, English footballer
April 14
Amy Dumas, American professional wrestler
Stefano Miceli, Italian conductor and pianist
Anderson Silva, Brazilian UFC Middleweight Champion
Takayoshi Tanimoto, Japanese singer

April 15 – Paul Dana, American race car driver (d. 2006)
April 17 – Lee Hyun-il, South Korean badminton player
April 22
Greg Moore, Canadian race car driver (d. 1999)
Carlos Sastre, Spanish road bicycle racer

April 23 – Olga Kern, Russian pianist
April 26 – India Summer, American pornographic actress
April 25 – Chris Lilley, Australian actor, comedian, and writer
April 27 – Kazuyoshi Funaki, Japanese ski jumper
April 30
Johnny Galecki, American actor
Mike Chat, American actor


=== May ===

May 1 – Marc-Vivien Foé, Cameroonian footballer (d. 2003)
May 2
David Beckham, English footballer
Ahmed Hassan, Egyptian footballer

May 3
Christina Hendricks, American actress
Kimora Lee Simmons, American fashion designer

May 7 – Jason Tunks, Canadian Olympic discus thrower
May 8
Enrique Iglesias, American singer
Jussi Markkanen, Finnish hockey player

May 9 – Chris Diamantopoulos, Canadian actor
May 10
Torbjørn Brundtland, Norwegian musician (Röyksopp)
Hélio Castroneves, Brazilian race car driver
Hazem Emam, Egyptian footballer

May 12 – Jonah Lomu, New Zealand rugby player (d. 2015)
May 13 – Itatí Cantoral, Mexican actress
May 15
Peter Iwers, Swedish rock bassist (In Flames)
Ray Lewis, American football player

May 16 – Tony Kakko, Finnish singer
May 18
John Higgins, Scottish snooker player
Jack Johnson, American singer-songwriter

May 19
London Fletcher, American football player
Jonas Renkse, Swedish musician
Mitsutoshi Shimabukuro, Japanese manga artist
Zhang Ning, Chinese badminton player

May 20
Tahmoh Penikett, Canadian actor
Miriam Quiambao, Filipina actress
Andrew Sega, American musician

May 22 – Janne Niinimaa, Finnish hockey player
May 23
Michiel van den Bos, Dutch composer
Molly Wood, executive editor at CNET.com

May 25 – Lauryn Hill, African-American singer
May 27
André 3000, American rapper, singer-songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, record producer and actor
Jamie Oliver, English chef, restaurateur and television personality

May 28 – Charmaine Sheh, Hong Kong actress
May 29
Jason Allison, Canadian hockey player
Melanie Brown, British singer (Spice Girls)
Daniel Tosh, American stand-up comedian
David Burtka, American actor and chef

May 30 – CeeLo Green, American singer-songwriter
May 31 – Toni Nieminen, Finnish ski jumper


=== June ===

June 4
Russell Brand, English comedian
Angelina Jolie, American actress

June 5 – Karen Strassman, American actress and voice actress
June 7
Shane Bond, New Zealand fast bowler
Allen Iverson, American basketball player

June 8 – Shilpa Shetty, Bollywood actress
June 9 – Andrew Symonds, Australian cricketer
June 10 – Darren Eadie, English footballer
June 11 – Choi Ji-woo, South Korean actress and model
June 14 – Chris Onstad, American cartoonist
June 15 – Elizabeth Reaser, American actress
June 16 – Anabel Conde, Spanish singer, Eurovision Song Contest 1995 runner-up
June 17 – Chloe Jones, American pornstar (d. 2005)
June 18 – Martin St. Louis, Canadian hockey player
June 19 – Ed Coode, British rower
June 23 – KT Tunstall, Scottish singer-songwriter
June 24 – Christie Rampone, American footballer
June 25
Linda Cardellini, American actress
Vladimir Kramnik, Russian chess player

June 27 – Tobey Maguire, American actor
June 28
Ning Baizura, Malaysian singer
Jon Nödtveidt, Swedish singer (d. 2006)

June 30
Ralf Schumacher, German racing car driver
Angela Tong, Hong Kong actress


=== July ===

July 5
Hernán Crespo, Argentinian footballer
Ai Sugiyama, Japanese tennis player

July 6 – 50 Cent, American rapper
July 9
Shelton Benjamin, American professional wrestler
Robert Koenig, American film director and producer
Jack White, American rock and blues musician

July 10 – Alain Nasreddine, Canadian ice hockey player
July 14 – Flore Zoé, Dutch photographer
July 15 – Jill Halfpenny, British actress
July 17
Elena Anaya, Spanish actress
Cécile de France, Belgian actress
Harlette, British fashion designer of lingerie
Konnie Huq, English television presenter

July 18 – Torii Hunter, American baseball player
July 19 – Patricia Ja Lee, American model/actress
July 20
Judy Greer, American actress and author
Ray Allen, American basketball player

July 21 – Fredrik Johansson, Swedish musician
July 22 – Kenshin Kawakami, Japanese baseball pitcher
July 24
Eric Szmanda, American actor
Torrie Wilson, American professional wrestler and model

July 25
Håvard Ellefsen, Norwegian rock (metal) musician
Evgeni Nabokov, Russian hockey goaltender

July 27
Shea Hillenbrand, American baseball player
Alex Rodriguez, American baseball player

July 29 – Terrence Wilkins, American football player
July 30 – Graham Nicholls, British artist
July 31 – Simon Hirst, British DJ


=== August ===

August 1
Danny Chan Kwok-kwan, Hong Kong actor
Vhrsti, Czech illustrator

August 3 – Yoyo Mung, Hong Kong actress
August 4 – Jason Crump, Australian Speedway rider, three times world champion
August 5
Kajol Devgan, Indian actress
Eicca Toppinen, Finnish cellist (Apocalyptica)

August 7
Gaahl (Kristian Eivind Espedal), Norwegian metal musician
Megan Gale, Australian model and actress
Charlize Theron, South African actress

August 11 – Roger Craig Smith, American voice actor
August 13 – Shoaib Akhtar, Pakistani fast bowler
August 15 – Kara Wolters, American women's basketball player
August 18 – Kaitlin Olson, American actress
August 22 – Sheree Murphy, English actress
August 24 – Hayato Sakurai, Japanese martial artist
August 25 – Raymond Wong Ho-yin, Hong Kong actor
August 27 – Björn Gelotte, Swedish musician
August 31 – Sara Ramirez, American Actress


=== September ===

September 1
Natalie Bassingthwaighte, Australian actress and singer
Elvira Rahić, Bosnian singer
Scott Speedman, Canadian actor

September 2 – David Jahn, Czech neo-burlesque impresario
September 3 – Redfoo, American disc jockey (LMFAO)
September 4 – Mark Ronson, English DJ, record producer, and singer
September 6 – Ryoko Tani, Japanese judoka
September 7 – Renato "Babalu" Sobral, Brazilian martial artist
September 9 – Michael Bublé, Canadian musician
September 10 – R. Luke DuBois, American composer and artist
September 11 – Brad Fischetti, American musician
September 13 – Peter Ho, American-Taiwanese singer and actor
September 16
Gal Fridman, Israeli windsurfer
Shannon Noll, Australian singer

September 17
Jimmie Johnson, American race car driver
Constantine Maroulis, American singer
Juan Pablo Montoya, Colombian race car driver
Austin St. John, American actor

September 18
Richard Appleby, English footballer
Jason Sudeikis, American actor and comedian

September 20
Asia Argento, Italian actress and singer and director
Moon Bloodgood, American actress

September 22
Mireille Enos, American actress
Ethan Moreau, Canadian hockey player

September 23 – Kim Dong-moon, South Korean badminton player
September 25
Declan Donnelly, British TV presenter, actor and singer
Matt Hasselbeck, American football player

September 27 – Sam Lee, Hong Kong actor
September 30
Marion Cotillard, French actress
Georges-Alain Jones, French singer


=== October ===

October 2 – Michel Trudeau, son of Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau and Margaret Trudeau (d. 1998)
October 5
Parminder Nagra, British actress
Monica Rial, American voice actress
Kate Winslet, British actress
Gao Yuanyuan, Chinese actress

October 7
Terry Gerin, American professional wrestler
Kaspars Znotiņš, Latvian actor

October 9 – Joe McFadden, Scottish actor
October 9 – Sean Lennon, American Musician
October 14
Floyd Landis, American cyclist
Shaznay Lewis, English singer (All Saints)

October 15 – Michél Mazingu-Dinzey, German-Congolese footballer
October 16 – Jacques Kallis, South African Cricket All-Rounder
October 17 – Janne Aikala, Finnish murder victim (d. 1986)
October 19 – Benjamin Heckendorn, American electronics modifier and independent filmmaker
October 20 – Natalie Gregory, American child actress
October 21 – Henrique Hilário, Portuguese footballer
October 22
Jesse Tyler Ferguson, American actor
Mike Riley, American cartoonist

October 23
Odalys García, Cuban-born actress
Keith Van Horn, American basketball player
Michelle Beadle, Sports reporter/host

October 25 – Zadie Smith, English writer
October 30 – Ian D'Sa, Canadian guitarist


=== November ===

November 3 – Marta Domínguez, Spanish athlete
November 4 – Éric Fichaud, Canadian hockey player
November 5
Lisa Scott-Lee, Welsh singer (Steps)
Jamie Spaniolo (Jamie Madrox), American rapper

November 8
Ángel Corella, Spanish dancer
Tara Reid, American actress

November 10 – Markko Märtin, Estonian race car driver
November 11 – Daisuke Ohata, Japanese rugby union player
November 12 – Jason Lezak, American swimmer
November 14 – Faye Tozer, English singer (Steps)
November 15 – Hiromi Ominami, Japanese long-distance runner
November 16
Julio Lugo, Dominican baseball player
Yuki Uchida, Japanese actress

November 18
Anthony McPartlin, British TV presenter, actor and singer
David Ortiz, Dominican baseball player

November 19 – Sushmita Sen, Indian beauty queen and actress
November 20 – Dierks Bentley, American country music singer
November 21
Chris Moneymaker, American poker player
Aaron Solowoniuk, Canadian drummer

November 22 – James Madio, American actor
November 24
Thomas Kohnstamm, American writer
Lee Wan Wah, Malaysian badminton player

November 28 – Eka Kurniawan, Indonesian writer
November 30 – Ben Thatcher, Welsh international footballer


=== December ===

December 2 – Malinda Williams, American actress
December 3 – Csaba Czébely, Hungarian heavy metal drummer (Pokolgép)
December 5
Sofi Marinova, Bulgarian pop-folk and ethno-pop singer
Ronnie O'Sullivan, British snooker player
Paula Patton, American actress

December 6 – Ashin, Taiwanese rock lead singer (Mayday)
December 8 – Kevin Harvick, American race car driver
December 10 – Joe Mays, American baseball pitcher
December 11 – Gerben de Knegt, Dutch cyclist
December 12
Mayim Bialik, American actress and neuroscientist
Houko Kuwashima, Japanese voice actress

December 13 – Tom DeLonge, American guitarist and vocalist
December 16
Frode Fjerdingstad, Norwegian photographer
Ben Kowalewicz, Canadian vocalist

December 17
Tim Clark, South African golfer
Nick Dinsmore, American professional wrestler
Susanthika Jayasinghe, Sri Lankan athlete
Milla Jovovich, Ukrainian-born American actress and model

December 18
Sia Furler (aka Sia), Australian singer-songwriter and music video director
Trish Stratus, Canadian professional wrestler and fitness model
Randy Houser, American country music singer
Masaki Sumitani, Japanese television performer

December 20 – Bartosz Bosacki, Polish footballer
December 21 – Paloma Herrera, Argentine ballet dancer
December 23
Vadim Sharifijanov, Russian ice hockey player

December 26 – Marcelo Ríos, Chilean tennis player
December 27 – Heather O'Rourke, American child actress (d. 1988)
December 29 – Shawn Hatosy, American actor
December 30
Yoma Komatsu, Japanese singer
Tiger Woods, American golfer

December 31 – Mikko Sirén, Finnish drummer


=== Date unknown ===
Gareth Edwards, British director
Sindre Goksøyr, Norwegian artist


== Deaths ==


=== January ===
January 3 – Victor Kraft, Austrian philosopher (b. 1880)
January 4 – Ole Rømer Aagaard Sandberg, Norwegian military officer and farmer. (b. 1888)
January 7 – Harry Gunnison Brown, economist teaching at Yale in 20th century (b. 1880)
January 8 – Louis P. Lochner, American political activist, journalist, and author (b. 1887)
January 9 – Pierre Fresnay, French actor (b. 1897)
January 17 – Gustavo Rojas Pinilla, former military President of Colombia (b. 1900)
January 18 – Evelyn Greeley, silent film actress (b. 1888)
January 19 – Thomas Hart Benton, American artist (b. 1889)
January 24
Larry Fine, American actor and comedian (b. 1902)
Erich Kempka, German chauffeur of Adolf Hitler (b. 1910)

January 27
Antonín Novotný, former Czechoslovak Communist leader and President (b. 1904)
Bill Walsh, American film producer and writer (b. 1913)

January 28 – Ola Raknes, Norwegian psychoanalyst and philologist (b. 1887)
January 31 – Don Kaye, co-founder of TSR, Inc. (b. 1938)


=== February ===

February 3 – Umm Kulthum, Egyptian actress and singer (b. 1904)
February 4 – Louis Jordan, American musician (b. 1908)
February 8
Robert Robinson, British chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1886)
Jan Mukařovský, Czech literary, linguistic, and aesthetic theorist. (b. 1891)

February 10 – Nikos Kavvadias, Greek poet and writer (stroke) (b. 1910)
February 11 – Richard Ratsimandrava, Madagascar President (assassinated) (b. 1931)
February 12 – Bernard Knowles, English film director (b. 1900)
February 13 – André Beaufre, French general (b. 1902)
February 14
Julian Huxley, British biologist (b. 1887)
P. G. Wodehouse, English writer (b. 1881)

February 15 – Michał Sopoćko, Polish saint, the Apostle of Divine Mercy (b. 1888)
February 16 – Morgan Taylor, American athlete (b. 1903)
February 17 – George Marshall, American film director (b. 1891)
February 18 – Chivu Stoica, Romanian Communist politician, former Prime Minister and head of State (b. 1908)
February 19 – Luigi Dallapiccola, Italian composer (b. 1904)
February 20 – Robert Strauss, American actor (b. 1913)
February 24 – Nikolai Bulganin, Premier of the Soviet Union (b. 1895)
February 25 – Elijah Muhammad, African-American Nation of Islam leader (b. 1897)
February 26 – Stephen Tibble, London police officer (shot) (b. 1953)
February 28 – Sir Nevi