1 Corinthians 9 is the ninth chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians in the New Testament of the Christian Bible. It is authored by Paul of Tarsus and Sosthenes in Ephesus.


== Text ==
The original text is written in Koine Greek.
Some most ancient manuscripts containing this chapter are:
Codex Vaticanus (AD 325-350)
Codex Sinaiticus (AD 330-360)
Codex Alexandrinus (ca. AD 400-440)
Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus (ca. AD 450; extant: verses 7-27)

This chapter is divided into 27 verses.


== Structure ==
This chapter can be grouped:
1 Corinthians 9:1-18 = A Pattern of Self-Denial
1 Corinthians 9:19-23 = Serving All Men
1 Corinthians 9:24-27 = Striving for a Crown


== Verse 5 ==
New King James Version
Do we have no right to take along a believing wife, as do also the other apostles, the brothers of the Lord, and Cephas?
Do we have no right to take along a believing wife (KJV: Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife)
The phrase "a sister, a wife", is an Hebraism, and answers to (hlkytxa), "my sister, spouse", (Song of Solomon 4:9 Song of Solomon 4:10; Song of Solomon 4:12) ( 5:1 ) . The Jews called their wives, sisters, not on account of religion, which also is not the meaning here; but because of the common relation that men and women, all mankind, stand in to one another, antecedent to any nearer relation, as that of man and wife. The sense the Papists put on these words, to secure them from being a proof of the lawfulness of the marriage of the ministers of the Gospel, can by no means be the true one; which is, that they are to be understood of a rich woman, or women, the apostles had a power to carry about with them, to minister of their substance to them, and provide for them; for such a sense is directly contrary to the subject and argument the apostle is upon; which is to show the right that he and others had, of casting themselves entirely upon the churches for a maintenance; whereas this is contriving a way for relieving the churches of such a charge; besides, the act of "leading", or carrying "about", is expressive of such a power over them, as cannot be thought to agree with persons of such substance; and whose voluntary act this must be, to go along with them and supply them; add to this, that for the apostles to lead about with them wherever they went women, whether rich or poor, that were not their wives, would be of no good report, and must tend to hurt their character and reputation: moreover, though these words clearly imply the lawfulness of a minister's marriage, and suppose it, yet they do not express the act itself, or the lawfulness of entering into such a state, but rather what follows after it; and the sense is this, that the apostle and others, supposing them to have wives, and it may be added also, and children, they had a right to take these with them wherever they went, and insist upon the maintenance of them, as well as of their own, at the public expense:
as well as other apostles;
who it seems did so, that had wives and families, as Philip the Evangelist had four daughters, (Acts 21:8; Acts 21:9).
And as the brethren of the Lord:
who it seems were married persons, and took such a method; by whom are meant James, Joses, Judas, and Simon; who were the near kinsmen of Christ, it being usual with the Jews to call such bret