Flag terminology is the nomenclature, or system of terms, used in vexillology, the study of flags, to describe precisely the parts, patterns, and other attributes of flags and their display.


== Description of standard flag parts and termsEdit ==

Badge
a coat of arms or simple heraldic symbol.
Canton
any quarter of a flag, but commonly means the upper hoist (left) quarter, such as the field of stars in the flag of the United States or the Union Jack in the Australian Flag.
Charge
a figure or symbol appearing in the field of a flag.
Emblem
a device often used as a charge on a flag. It may be heraldic in origin or modern, for example the maple leaf on the Canadian Flag.
Field
the background of a flag; the color behind the charges.
Fimbriation
a narrow edging or border, often in white or gold, on a flag to separate two other colors. For example the white and gold lines of the South African Flag.
Fly
the half or edge of a flag farthest away from the flagpole. This term also sometimes refers to the horizontal length of a flag.
Hoist
the half or edge of a flag nearest to the flagpole. This term also sometimes refers to the vertical width of a flag.
Length
the span of a flag along the side at right angles to the flagpole.
Width
the span of a flag down the side parallel to the flagpole.


== Basic patterns in flagsEdit ==
Flags often inherit traits seen in traditional European heraldry designs and as a result patterns often share names.
Canton
Pale
Bend
Chevron
Pall
Saltire
Fesses
Border/Bordure
Crosses


== Techniques in flag displayEdit ==
Distress
flying the flag upside-down, or tying it into a wheft.
Half-mast
a style of flag display where the flag is flown at least the width of the flag between the top of the flag and the top of the pole.
Hoist
the act or function of raising a flag, as on a rope.
Lower
the act or function of taking down a flag, as on a rope.


=== IllustrationsEdit ===
Flag illustrations generally depict flags flying from the observer's point of view from left to right, the view known as the obverse (or "front"); the other side is the reverse (or "back"). There are some exceptions, notably some Islamic flags inscribed in Arabic, for which the obverse is defined as the side with the hoist to the observer's right.


== Flag identification symbolsEdit ==

A vexillological symbol is used by vexillologists to indicate certain characteristics of national flags, such as where they are used, who uses them, and what they look like. The set of symbols described in this article are known as international flag identification symbols, which were devised by Whitney Smith.


=== National flag variants by useEdit ===
Some countries use a single flag design to serve as the national flag in all contexts of use; others use multiple flags that serve as the national flag, depending on context (i.e., who is flying the national flag and where). The six basic contexts of use (and potential variants of a national flag) are:
 civil flag – Flown by citizens on land.
 state flag – Flown on public buildings.
 war flag – Flown on military buildings.
 civil ensign – Flown on private vessels (fishing craft, cruise ships, yachts, etc.).
 state ensign – Flown on unarmed government vessels.
 war ensign – Flown on warships.
In practice, a single design may be associated with multiple such usages; for example, a single design may serve a dual role as  war flag and ensign. Even with such combinations, this framework is not complete: some countries define designs for usage contexts not expressible in this scheme such as air force ensigns (distinct from war flags or war ensigns, flown as the national flag at air bases; for example, see Royal Air Force Ensign) and civil air ensigns.


=== Other symbolsEdit ===
Other symbols are used to describe how a flag looks, such as whether it has a different design on each side, or if it is hung vertically, etc. These are the symbols in general use:
 Normal or de jure version of flag, or obverse side
 Design was proposed in the past, but nev