Vanderbijlpark (Dutch pronunciation: [fɐndɛrbɛi̯lˈpɑːrk]) is an industrial city with 95 000 inhabitants on the Vaal River in the south of the Gauteng province of South Africa.
Named after Hendrik van der Bijl, an electrical engineer and industrialist, Vanderbijlpark is home to Vanderbijlpark Steel (previously part of ISCOR (South African Iron and Steel Corporation), now part of the global company ArcelorMittal). With neighbouring towns Vereeniging and Sasolburg it forms the Vaal Triangle, a major industrial region of South Africa. Located in the district municipality of Sedibeng and the local municipality of Emfuleni.
The historical black townships Boipatong, Bophelong, Sebokeng, Evaton and Sharpeville are close to the city.
Vanderbijlpark is also home to Cape Gate (Pty) Ltd, a major market share holder in the wire industry.


== History ==
In 1920, Dr HJ van der Bijl, a young South African electrical engineer working in the United States at the time, was called back to South Africa by the then Prime Minister Jan Smuts to advise the government in the planning of South Africa's industrial development. Van der Bijl oversaw the Iron and Steel Corporation's first plant at Pretoria, but with the increased demand after World War II, 100 km² was bought to build a large steel works and model town. The steel works began operating in 1947 and the town was proclaimed in 1949. The town attained municipal status in 1952 when Governor General Dr EG Jansen opened ISCOR's second steel works. The founder of the town, Hendrik van der Bijl, had his old house situated in Grieg street, in the affluent SW 5 proper suburb.


== Climate ==
Vanderbijlpark is situated on the Highveld of South Africa on the banks of the Vaal River. Summers in the city are warm to hot with an average high between 31 and 35, and an average low between 15 and 22. Winters in the city are cool to warm with an average high of between 18 and 23 and an average low of between -1 and 5 .


== Suburbs ==
Vanderbijlpark has been designed in a circular design, which differs from the traditional grid design of towns. The town is divided into four distinct residential blocks, namely:
CE (Central East)
CW (Central West)
SE (South East)
SW (South West)
Vanderbijlpark CBD on Wikimapia

The different suburbs are then named as follows:
CE1
CE2
CE3
CE4
CW1
CW2
CW3
CW4
CW5
CW6
SE1
SE2
SE3
SE4
SE6
SE7
SE8
SW1
SW2
SW5
The other suburbs of Vanderbijlpark are:
Boipatong
Bophelong
Bonnane
Flora Gardens
There are also a number of small holdings in Vanderbijlpark:
Theoville
Lamont Park


== Economy ==

About 60% of the town's workforce are employed in factories. The rest work for the Government, private businesses, shops or in the service sector. Rossini Boulevard used to be a residential area, but in recent years most of the homes have been turned into informal businesses.


== Architecture ==
Most of the town's houses were built by ISCOR during the 1947–1964 period, these homes are all built in exactly the same format. About 60% of the town's population live in these homes. A few suburbs close to the Vaal River are modern and have wealthy areas. There are large and modern buildings and apartment buildings in the open areas around the CBD.
The suburb area SW5 houses some of the most extravagant and sought after houses in the Vaal triangle. Dr HJ van der Bijl and Aldridge had built their private estates in this area during the 1920s, and these homes are now privately owned and still preserved in the area. Some of the stands in the area range between 2–4 acres. The stands used to be much bigger in the day of Dr van der Bijl, however further development of the town increased the use of subdivided stands.
Another part of the Vaal's wealth lies on the Marlbank of the Vaal River towards Loch Vaal, west of the CBD. Some of these houses sized up to 2,000 square meters and more. The area is often also referred to as "millionaires bend" and houses some of the most expensive homes in South-Africa, ranging into the R10 millions for an estate.
Vanderbijlpark has major influences of French, German and Italian architecture, due to the settlement of foreigners in the late 1800s and early 1900s. The building industry used to be owned by a select group of wealthy developers in the early 1900s up until the late 1980s by companies such as Visser Properties, Dias Family, Storm Family to name a few. Construction and design companies thrived during these times, such as van der Merwe & Associates Engineering, DOS Gwendolyn van Wyk, Leslie van Wyk and Riscali who was renamed to Riscali from DOS in 2012.


== Education ==
There are over 60 primary and secondary schools within the Vaal Triangle area. Of these, 20 primary and 8 secondary schools are located in Vanderbijlpark. There are about 4 Private Schools in Vanderbijpark, Namely: El Shaddai School, Emmanuel Christian School, Vaal Primary School and Santa Maria Junior School.


=== Secondary Education ===
Secondary Schools located in Vanderbijlpark are Hoër Tegniese Skool Carel de Wet, Hoërskool Driehoek, Prestigious Aurete, Hoërskool Suiderlig (formerly Hoër Handelskool Lettie Fouché), Suncrest High, Hoërskool Transvalia, The Vaal High School, Hoërskool Vanderbijlpark and Tsolo Secondary School.


=== Tertiary Education ===
The Vaal Triangle Campus of the North-West University is located in Vanderbijlpark. This campus is situated on the banks of the Vaal River and has student numbers exceeding 3,000.
The main campus of Vaal University of Technology is located in Vanderbijlpark, about 1 km from the North West University.
Qualitas Career Academy, a national private college has its largest campus in SE4. It caters for full-time and part-time studies for students as well as corporate training and consulting services for businesses and government departments.
The Computer Training institute (CT