A województwo [vɔjɛˈvut͡stfɔ]; plural: województwa) is the highest-level administrative subdivision of Poland, corresponding to a "province" in many other countries. The term "województwo" has been in use since the 14th century, and is commonly translated in English as "province". The word "województwo" is also rendered as "voivodeship" or a variant spelling.
The Polish local government reforms adopted in 1998, which went into effect on 1 January 1999, created sixteen new voivodeships. These replaced the 49 former voivodeships that had existed from 1 July 1975.
Today's voivodeships are mostly named after historical and geographical regions, while those prior to 1998 generally took their names from the cities on which they were centered. The new units range in area from under 10,000 km2 (3,900 sq mi) (Opole Voivodeship) to over 35,000 km2 (14,000 sq mi) (Masovian Voivodeship), and in population from one million (Lubusz Voivodeship) to over five million (Masovian Voivodeship).
Administrative authority at voivodeship level is shared between a government-appointed governor called a voivode (Polish wojewoda), an elected assembly called a sejmik, and an executive chosen by that assembly. The leader of that executive is called the marszałek województwa (voivodeship marshal). Voivodeships are further divided into powiats (counties) and gminas (communes or municipalities): see Administrative divisions of Poland.


== Voivodeships since 1999 ==


=== Administrative powers ===
Competences and powers at voivodeship level are shared between the voivode (governor), the sejmik (regional assembly) and the executive. In most cases these institutions are all based in one city, but in Kuyavian-Pomeranian and Lubusz Voivodeship the voivode's offices are in a different city from those of the executive and the sejmik. Voivodeship capitals are listed in the table below.
The voivode is appointed by the Prime Minister and is the regional representative of the central government. The voivode acts as the head of central government institutions at regional level (such as the police and fire services, passport offices, and various inspectorates), manages central government property in the region, oversees the functioning of local government, coordinates actions in the field of public safety and environment protection, and exercises special powers in emergencies. The voivode's offices collectively are known as the urząd wojewódzki.
The sejmik is elected every four years, at the same time as the local authorities at powiat and gmina level. It passes bylaws, including the voivodeship's development strategies and budget. It also elects the marszałek and other members of the executive, and holds them to account.
The executive (zarząd województwa), headed by the marszałek, drafts the budget and development strategies, implements the resolutions of the sejmik, manages the voivodeship's property, and deals with many aspects of regional policy, including management of European Union funding. Its offices collectively are known as the urząd marszałkowski.


=== List of voivodeships ===


== Former voivodeships ==


=== Poland's voivodeships 1975–1998 ===

Administrative division of Poland between 1979 and 1998 included 49 voivodeships upheld after the establishment of the Third Polish Republic in 1989 for another decade. This reorganization of administrative division of Poland was mainly a result of local government reform acts of 1973–1975. In place of the three-level administrative division (voivodeship, county, commune), a new two-level administrative division was introduced (49 small voivodeships, and communes). The three smallest voivodeships – Warsaw, Kraków and Łódź – had the special status of municipal voivodeship; the city president (mayor) was also provincial governor.


=== Poland's voivodeships 1945–1975 ===

After World War II, the new administrative division of the country within the new national borders was based on the prewar one and included 14 (+2) voivodeships, then 17 (+5). The voivodeships in the east that had not been annexed by the Soviet Union had their borders left almost unchanged. The newly acquired territories in the west and north were organized into the new voivodeships of Szczecin, Wrocław and Olsztyn, and partly joined to Gdańsk, Katowice and Poznań voivodeships. Two cities were granted voivodeship status: Warsaw and Łódź.
In 1950, new voivodeships were created: Koszalin (previously part of Szczecin), Opole (previously part of Katowice), and Zielona Góra (previously part of Poznań, Wrocław and Szczecin voivodeships).
In 1957, three more cities were granted voivodeship status: Wrocław, Kraków and Poznań.


=== Poland's voivodeships 1921–1939 ===

The administrative division of Poland in the interwar period included 16 voivodeships and Warsaw (with voivodeship rights).
They were very similar to the current voivodeships.


=== Congress Poland 1816–1837 ===

From 1816 to 1837 there were 8 voivodeships in Congress Poland.
Augustów Voivodeship
Kalisz Voivodeship
Kraków Voivodeship
Lublin Voivodeship
Mazowsze Voivodeship
Płock Voivodeship
Podlasie Voivodeship
Sandomierz Voivodeship


=== Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth 1569–1795 ===


==== Greater Poland (Wielkopolska) ====
Poznań Voivodeship (województwo poznańskie, Poznań)
Kalisz Voivodeship (województwo kaliskie, Kalisz)
Gniezno Voivodeship (województwo gnieźnieńskie, Gniezno) from 1768
Sieradz Voivodeship (województwo sieradzkie, Sieradz)
Łęczyca Voivodeship (województwo łęczyckie, Łęczyca)
Brześć Kujawski Voivodeship (województwo brzesko-kujawskie, Brześć Kujawski)
Inowrocław Voivodeship (województwo inowrocławskie, Inowrocław)
Chełmno Voivodeship (województwo chełmińskie, Chełmno)
Malbork Voivodeship (województwo malborskie, Malbork)
Pomeranian Voivodeship (województwo pomorskie, Gdańsk)
Duchy of Warmia (Księstwo Warmińskie, Lidzbark Warmiński)
Duchy of Prussia (Księstwo Pruskie, Królewiec) (Then Königsberg)
Płock Voivodeship (województwo płockie, Płock)
Rawa Voivodeship (województwo rawskie, Rawa Mazowiecka)
Masovian Voivodeship (województwo mazowieckie, Warszawa)


==== Lesser Poland (Małopolska) ====
Kraków Voivodeship (województwo krakowskie, Kraków)
Sandomierz Voivodeship (województwo sandomierskie, Sandomierz)
Lublin Voivodeship (województwo lubelskie, Lublin)
Podlaskie Voivodeship (województwo podlaskie, Drohiczyn)
Ruthenian Voivodeship (województwo ruskie, Lwów)
Bełz Voivodeship (województwo belzkie, Bełz)
Volhynian Voivodeship (województwo wołyńskie, Łuck)
Podole Voivodeship (województwo podolskie, Kamieniec Podolski)
Bracław Voivodeship (województwo bracławskie, Bracław)
Kijów Voivodeship (województwo kijowskie, Kijów)
Czernihów Voivodeship (województwo czernichowskie, Czernihów)


==== Grand Duchy of Lithuania ====
Wilno Voivodship (województwo wileńskie, Wilno)
Troki Voivodship (województwo trockie, Troki)
Nowogrodek Voivodship (województwo nowogrodzkie, Nowogródek)
Brest-Litovsk Voivodship (województwo brzesko-litewskie, Brześć Litewski)
Minsk Voivodship (województwo mińskie, Mińsk)
Mscislaw Voivodship (województwo mścisławskie, Mscislaw)
Smolensk Voivodship (województwo smoleńskie, Smoleńsk)
Vitebsk Voivodship (województwo witebskie, Witebsk)
Polock Voivodship (województwo połockie, Połock)
Duchy of Samogita (księstwo żmudzkie, Miedniki-Wornie)


==== Duchy of Livonia ====
Wenden Voivodship (województwo wendeńskie, Wenden) since 1598 till the 1620s
Dorpat Voivodship (województwo dorpackie, Dorpat) since 1598 till the 1620s
Parnawa Voivodship (województwo parnawskie, Parnava) since 1598 till the 1620s
Inflanty Voivodeship (województwo inflanckie Dyneburg) since the 1620s
Duchy of Courland and Semigalia (księstwo Kurlandii i Semigalii), Mitawa)


== Etymology and use of "voivodeship" ==
Some English-language sources, in historic contexts, speak of "palatinates" rather than "voivodeships"; the former term traces back to the Latin palatinus ("palatine"). More commonly used now is "voivodeship", a loanword-calque hybrid formed on the Polish "województwo". Other sources refer instead to "provinces" (Polish singular: "prowincja"), though in pre-1795 contexts this may be confusing because the cognate Polish "prowincyja" (as it was then spelled) was idiosyncratically applied, until the last of the three Partitions of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, in 1795, to each of the three main Regions (Greater Poland, Lesser Poland, and Lithuania) of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, each of those Regions in turn comprising a number of województwa (plural of "województwo").
The Polish "województwo", designating a second-tier Polish or Polish–Lithuanian administrative unit, derives from "wojewoda" (etymologically,