Young's Analytical Concordance to the Bible is a concordance to the Bible compiled by Robert Young first published in 1879.


== ContentsEdit ==
Hints and Helps to Bible Interpretation (not in all editions)
Analytical Concordance - Each entry can contain the multiple original language words in the original language and in a phonetic vocalization into English. It also gives the extended meaning and usage of the word in the original language. Note that this is a "Bible concordance" to the King James Version (KJV) and not a lexicon of the Koine language.
The 20th American edition, first published in 1910, was revised throughout by Wm. B. Stevenson. To which is added an important supplement, entitled "A sketch of recent exploration in Bible lands", by Thomas Nicol.
Later editions include a supplement entitled the Canon of Scripture by R. K. Harrison and Everett F. Harrison.


== Relative meritsEdit ==
Although Strong's is more popular and has its strengths, Young's is better for word studies due in part to the way it analyzes English words: for example, several different Greek or Hebrew words can be translated by one English word. Young shows this by analyzing the English word showing all of the Greek or Hebrew words it translates and then lists the verses containing each occurrence of the various Greek or Hebrew words. This can make for more accurate word studies.
Young's Analytical Concordance organizes words according to their Greek or Hebrew words *(in addition to the English) so that there is no need (in many cases) to look up a number and then to check for that number as a second step. This is handy for everyone, regardless of whether you know Greek or Hebrew, as you can quickly see all the Greek (or Hebrew) words that are the same original word. This makes word studies much easier to do (than with Concordances such as Strong's or Cruden's).
However, there is a revised and corrected version of this Concordance that has been available for many years *(at least since the 70's). Check the preface and title page for indication that these corrections are in any version that you want to purchase. If you wonder why this book is not widely available in most Bible Study Software packages, it is simply because most software search engines duplicate this work by way of their built-in 