Züm (pronounced Zoom, IPA: /zuːm/) is a bus rapid transit system for the suburban city of Brampton, Ontario, Canada, northwest of Toronto owned and operated by Brampton Transit. The first phase calls for three corridors operating in mixed traffic, similar to York Region Transit's (YRT) Viva network. There are connections to the City of Mississauga, York Region, and the City of Toronto, with the first corridor having started service in fall 2010. Phase 1 is expected to be fully operational by fall 2012. A key aspect of the Züm plan is increased service on supporting local corridors. Unlike other, similar, services and partly due to Brampton's geographic position farther from Toronto than other suburbs such as Mississauga or Vaughan, many Züm corridors will overlap significantly with other agencies' services, requiring more complex, co-operative planning between neighbouring cities. During the planning of this bus rapid transit system, Züm was called "Acceleride".


== RoutesEdit ==
Phase 1 calls for three express corridors to improve service on some of Brampton's busiest routes.
Some stops and routes are located outside of Brampton, namely Mississauga, Toronto and Vaughan. Once the Queen route leaves Brampton and enters Vaughan, the bus schedule alternates between express (along Highway 407) with no stops until York University, or regular (along York Regional Road 7) with stops at all stations that are on the York Region Transit Viva Orange route. Brampton Transit has a fare partnership agreement with York Region Transit that allows for boarding and debarking anywhere along the Viva Orange route, using Züm buses. This was particularly convenient during a labour dispute involving select contracted companies at York Region Transit resulting in the temporary suspension of Viva Orange.


== ExpansionEdit ==
In phase 2, the existing routes will be extended to the west. Beyond Phase 2, the agency plans to look into exclusive busways.


== TerminalsEdit ==
In preparation for the launch of Route 501 (Queen Street), Brampton Transit re-built its Bramalea City Centre terminal, relocating it from its previous location beside Clark Boulevard, on the south side of the shopping centre, to the north-east corner, adjacent to Queen Street. Minor renovations will also be performed at the downtown terminal.
In preparation for the launch of its Steeles Avenue route, Brampton Transit will also relocate the Shoppers' World terminal, near Hurontario and Steeles, to be closer to Hurontario/Main Street.
Züm will use Brampton's downtown, Bramalea Centre, and Shoppers' World terminals, in addition to Mississauga's City Centre terminal, and Toronto's York University Commons terminal. In 2016, Züm will connect to the TTC subway system at Vaughan Metropolitan Centre.

These are intermodal points that allow transfers to other modes such as Brampton Transit, Mississauga Transit, GO Transit, Toronto Transit Commission.
Airport Loop – Bovaird Corridor (2014)
Bramalea GO – Steeles Corridor (2012)
Brampton City Centre – Queen Corridor (2010)
Chinguacousy – Queen Street Corridor (2014)
Downtown – Queen Corridor (2010)
Humber College (Toronto) – Steeles Corridor (2012)
Hurontario-407 – Main Corridor (late 2012 and beyond)
Lisgar GO (Mississauga) – Steeles Corridor (late 2012 and beyond)
Mount Pleasant GO – Bovaird Corridor (2014)
Sandalwood Loop – Main Corridor (2011)
Shoppers World – Main Corridor (2011)
Square One (Mississauga Transit Centre) – Main Corridor (2012)
Vaughan Metropolitan Centre TTC Subway Station - Queen Street Corridor (2016)
York University (Toronto) – Queen Corridor (2010)


== FaresEdit ==
With York Region's Viva as a 